---
title: "Coursera: Learning How to Learn"
date:  2017-03-20
...
## Week 1

### Focused vs. Diffuse Thinking

The first concept introduced is 'focused' vs. 'diffuse' thinking modes. These
seem to correspond to Kahneman's System 1 and System 2. Focused thinking is
useful to analyze a class of problem you are familiar with, and diffuse (System
1, subconscious) is useful to juggle concepts you aren't as familiar with.

#### Using Focused and Diffuse Modes

Both Dali and Edison would sometimes fall asleep in chairs, holding things they
would drop as they fell asleep, waking them up. This is presented as using the
two learning modes -- thinking in Focused mode about a problem, then relaxing,
drifting off to sleep even in Diffuse mode, then returning to Focused mode to
refine the broad-spectrum thinking. Another analogy of weightlifting is used to
point out how learning must be done on a relaxed schedule: you can't become a
weightlifter overnight.

#### What is Learning?

There are a lot of loosely related facts (and factoids?) here. He talks about
areas of the brain active during day-to-day activities, compared to the regions
active when calm and trying to relax (Default Mode Network). He talks about
neuroplasticity, the number of neurons and synapses we have. He talks about how
when we learn anything, many new connections are formed between adjacent
neurons. At the end is a link to [brainfacts.org](http://brainfacts.org), and a
quote from Macbeth: 

> "<strong>Sleep</strong> that knits up the raveled sleave of care, The
<strong>death of each day's life</strong>, sore labor's bath, Balm of hurt
minds, great nature's second course, Chief nourisher in life's feast."

The takeaway here is "death of each day's life", pointing out how as we sleep,
we're forming new connections, changing the structure of our brains.

### Procrastination, Memory, and Sleep

Procrastination is introduced as a pain-avoidance mechanism. When we contemplate
doing something that gives us a marginal amount of anxiety for any reason, we
look for something lower-effort to occupy us. In most cases, if we would just
get started on the thing we were avoiding, the pain/anxiety vanishes quickly.

The Pomodoro technique is a method to trick ourselves into getting over this
speedbump of procrastination, by pre-committing to focusing on something for 25
minutes, then taking a short break.

#### Practice Makes Permanent

Segment opens with an anecdote about how it's possible to learn things you
think you're bad at with practice.

Math and Science seem harder to learn than other things, because the concepts
they deal with are entirely abstract. This is different from other abstract
concepts in life, which normally relate to emotions, experiences, etc. -- things
we have circuitry to reason about already. With math, etc., we have to practice
reasoning about entirely new abstractions.

When learning a new pattern, it's useful to reinforce that learning over the
course of multiple days. Solving a problem once will leave us with a faint
imprint of the solution, but re-solving it will drill the pattern in in a much
more permanent and stronger way.

#### Introduction to Memory

There are many ways to conceptualize memory, but this course will deal with
Working Memory (or Short-Term Memory) and Long-Term Memory. For a long time,
people have said our working memory has about 7 'slots', but new research
suggests it's actually 4, but we're good at Chunking information to optimize
storage. Video talks about closing our eyes to block out other information,
repeating a phone number to ourselves, and so on. Working memory is centralized
in the pre-frontal cortex. Long-Term Memory is stabilized by repetition,
especially spaced through time. The video introduces Spaced Repetition as a tool
for forming long-term memories.

#### The Importance of Sleep in Learning

*TL;DR*: Sleep is good. Apparently when we sleep, our brain cells 'shrink',
increasing the intercellular space, which allows the brain to flush out
metabolic toxin that accumulate while we're awake. Additional points are made
about diffuse thinking, and reinforcing and purging memories.

## Week 2

### Chunking

Our working memory has only ~4 slots, but each slot can reference a concept we
already know. Essentially, by grouping bits of information into a larger chunk,
we increase the apparent effectiveness of working memory, and other cognitive
processes. This is a completely normal thing, but useful to give a name to.

When we're stressed, angry, etc., the process that links working memory to
long-term memory chunks doesn't work as well.

#### How to Form a Chunk

> **Focussed attention, Understanding, and Practice**

* Focussed attention: If we're distracted, we aren't able to form chunks as
  effectively.
* Understanding: Having the big picture helps to form chunks, and especially to
  form useful chunks in context that can be recalled in the right situations
* Practice: Reinforces chunks, builds various activation pathways.

Skimming all the titles and pictures in a book before reading is a great way to
build big-picture context in order to fit chunks in the right place while
working through in a more detailed way.

Bottom-up and top-down learning are useful in combination. Top-down learning
indicates the context-building breadth-first activities (picture walk, etc.),
and bottom-up means reinforcing individual chunks through practice.

### Illusions of Competence

It's easy to imagine we're more competent than we are after studying some
material. One especially useful trick to improve long-term memory formation and
to ensure you actually understand the concepts is to put down the source
material periodically and try to recall the core ideas. This shows you where
your understanding is deficient, and also encourages memory formation.

Recalling material in different physical locations can also be helpful, since
it's possible to encode memories that take cues from your environment at the
time of study. These memories will be easier to access in the future if purged
of their environmental connection.

